# Semantics and Configs

## Making your first webpage

1. set up a project folder with git and github
2. make a file named `index.html` since browsers will look for that first.
3. Slap this boilerplate in:

    ```html
    <!DOCTYPE html>
    <html lang="en">
    <head>
        <meta charset="UTF-8">
        <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0">
        <meta http-equiv="X-UA-Compatible" content="ie=edge">
        <title>HTML 5 Boilerplate</title>
        <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css">
    </head>
    <body>
        <script src="index.js"></script>
    </body>
    </html>
    ```

### What each part of the boilerplate does

> [!tip] Emmet autocomplete
> You can trigger the html boilerplate using `!`, then press tab to autocomplete it. Theres also a bunch of other autocomplete stuff you can do with this. [Cheat sheet for reference.](https://docs.emmet.io/cheatsheet-a5.pdf)

- `<Doctype>` &#8212; indicates the language specification that your browser should render your website in.
    - Without this, the browser will interpret the project using "quirks mode", which is how legacy code was interpreted before W3 conventions were made (and essentially, your content will be interpreted like one from a pre-html era).
    - Relevant documentation: [doctype tag](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Doctype) | [quirks mode and standard mode](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Guides/Quirks_mode_and_standards_mode)
- `<html>` &#8212; considered a root element since it is the top level element, outlines details about the rest of your content.
    - declare meta information like your the document's language. Technically you can also declare the version, but its implied from doctype so don't.
- `<meta>`, `<title>` and `<head>` &#8212; metadata about your website is stored in the header section
    - DO NOT PUT ANY DISPLAY CONTENT IN THE HEADER CONETENT
    - `<meta>` content just indicate metadata that your document has (ie the encoding method of your characters)
    - `<title>` content is just displayed in areas like your tab description in your browser.
        - without a tag, the tab's name would just be the name of the file.
- `<body>` &#8212; for the actual content of your website that users will see.

## Typical body elements

- `<p>` for paragraphs
- `<strong>` or `<b>` for bolding cotntent
    - `b` just adds bold fontface, `strong` indicates the text is significant
- `<em>` or `<i>` for italics, same relationship as `b` and `strong`
- `<h1>` to `<h6>` for headings
- `<!-- comments -->` for developer documentation

### list elements

- `<li>` to indicate a section for a list
- `<ul>` for unordered bullet lists
- `<ol>` for ordered numbered lists

## variety content elements

- `<a>` as an anchor tag to link objects
    - use the `href` attribute (set the destination link and clicking the element will bring you there)
    - use the `target` attribute to change your browser behaviour when clicking the link. Setting the value to:
        - `_self` (the default if left blank) &#8212; opens the link in the current tab
        - `_blank` &#8212; opens the link in a new tab.
    - `rel` attribute sets permissions like whether you're able to visit the previous link (ie when you have a form over multiple pages)
        - use the `noopener` value to prevent any access to the previous page after its has ben accessed (even via javascript)
            - This is to prevent phishing attacks, where the previous page's content can be modified to trick users (see [tabnabbing](https://owasp.org/www-community/attacks/Reverse_Tabnabbing)).
        - use `noreferrer` to also not tell the new link where users have been.
        - This is not really needed since newer browsers have more security features, but still good practice.
    - href values can either be relative links to some other page in your website, or absolute links that lead outside your site.
