# Configuring Vim / NeoVim

<!-- using this opportunity to practice vim motions. -->
Take the time to read [Vineeth's blog post](https://vineeth.io/posts/neovim-setup), its a good starting point. Otherwise, this article is just as good a TLDR.  

## Prerequisites

Get [Neovim](https://neovim.io/), [Vim](https://www.vim.org/download.php) and [Ripgrep](https://www.linode.com/docs/guides/ripgrep-linux-installation/#install-ripgrep-on-macos-and-windows).

If they've been installed properly, running these commands should work (on Windows):

| Program | shell | line |
| ----------- |----------- |----------- |
| NeoVim | Powershell | `nvim --version` | |
| Vim | PowerShell | `vim --version` |
| Ripgrep | git bash | `rg --version` |

## Neovim config file structure

This was based on [ThePrimeagen's](https://youtu.be/w7i4amO_zaE?si=cyJ9sG9J18b_ZNCy) video and the [blog post](https://vineeth.io/posts/neovim-setup#structure).

1. Figure out what folder path neovim is using to find your configurations scripts.
   - Check by opening neovim with `nvim .` from your terminal, then do `:set runtimepath?` from NORMAL mode. For simplicity, just use the first folder that is listed. (on my machine, its `~\AppData\Local\nvim\`.)
     - The `~` stands for your home directory, and looks something like `C:/users/<user name>` on windows, but may differ based on your configuration.

2. Create the following file structure in your configuration Directory:

    ```txt.
    .
    └── C:/users/<user name>/AppData/Local/nvim/ (the config folder)
        ├── init.lua (script that runs on startup)
        ├── lua/
        │   └── config_profile/
        │       └── files_required_before_user
        └── any_prog_language/
            └── config_profile/
                └── files_required_before_user (for language specific configs)
    ```

    - `init.lua` - initialization file, runs each time a new instance of neovim is created, and can be specified for every folder that configuration info needs to be drawn from.

    - Customization can be done for specific languages, so any time theyre run, scripts under the language dir will run and configure the files before you see it. Organise it with self-named "config_profile" folders.
        - However, the `lua` directory is special because neovim will check it first and everything under it is requirable, so all setup should be done under the <u>profile folder</u> (`<config folder>/lua/config_profile/`).

> [!tip] Random Tips and Tricks
> if there some issue with your config or just anything in general with the folder in question, you run the line below in your CLI after replacing your filepath:
>
> ```PowerShell
> nvim --headless -c 'luafile C:\Users\<YourUsername>\AppData\Local\nvim\init.lua' -c 'echo "Loaded successfully"' -c 'qa'
>   ```
>
> To check if you have any errors in the languages you've configured.
>
> - if the command runs successfully, you'll just see `"Loaded successfully"` in your terminal.
  
> [!warning] Make sure to check with the right editor.
> I wrote it in vim and checked whether it works in vim with `vim .` . Shoulda used `nvim .` and ran neovim to see if my configs worked.

## Implementing your own major changes

### Basic Key remaps

> [!tip] Writing new mappings for vanilla neovim functions
> Changes are outlined using `profle folder/remap.lua`.
>
> - `vim.g.mapleader` - variable string of characters vim watches for  command executions
> - `vim.keymap.set(<mode>,<new_bind>,<original_function>)` - while in a specific `mode`, the trigger for `original_function` is now `new_bind`.
>     - your bindings can have the `<header>` prefix to indicate they follow the header.
>

- `Ex` &#8594; `<space>pv` - For entering FE mode from NORMAL mode

### Installing a Plugin Manager

For getting packages like fuzy-finders (or a plugin called harpoon). We will be using [`Lazyvim`](https://github.com/LazyVim/LazyVim).

> [!TIP] installing package managers like Lazy.lua
> Make a file for it under nvim > language folder .
>
> - `vim.g.mapleader` - variable string of characters vim watches for  command executions
> - `vim.keymap.set(<mode>,<new_bind>,<original_function>)` - while in a specific `mode`, the trigger for `original_function` is now `new_bind`.
>     - your bindings can have the `<header>` prefix to indicate they follow the header.

1. Install packer via cli with their git clone command
2. Create a file under your `config_profile` folder
3. jut copy in this bit of code into the file:

    ```lua
    -- This file can be loaded by calling `lua require('plugins')` from your init.vim

    -- Only required if you have packer configured as `opt`
    vim.cmd [[packadd packer.nvim]]

    return require('packer').startup(function(use)
    use 'wbthomason/packer.nvim'
    
    -- packages are added between these 2 statements, with keyword 'use'.

    end)
    ```

4. Save, restart neovim then do command `:PackerSync` while the `packer.lua` file is open to check if it works, it should give you a new dialog window and now you have a new package manager.

### Installing plugins (demo with Telescope)
>
>[!note] Update from the future
> Installations are unique to each package manager. If you're using a different package manager that isn't packer, please check what it should be. CAA 2025, the Lazyvim is the Packer's successor so check what it should be. Packer should still work, just that the repo isn't maintained anymore.

> [!TIP] General Plugin installation method
>
> 1. Add script to from package manager file to tell package manager what to install
> 2. Run package manager to install everything ( do `:PackerSync`)
> 3. add plugin-specific config scripts under `.config/nvim/after/plugin/plugin_name.lua`
>
>

1. Add it to the `packer.lua` (or whichever file thats responsible for controlling your package manager's behaviour) with the following code:

   ```lua
    use {
        'nvim-telescope/telescope.nvim', tag = '0.1.8',
        -- or                            , branch = '0.1.x',
        requires = { {'nvim-lua/plenary.nvim'} }
    }
   ```

#### Key Remaps for Telescope

For plugin specific remaps, you need to set up the following file structure:

```txt
.
└── C:/users/<user name>/AppData/Local/
    ├── nvim/
    ├── init.lua
    ├── lua/
    │   └── config_profile/
    │       └── files_required_before_user
    ├── any_prog_language/
    │   └── config_profile/
    │       └── files_required_before_user
    ├── plugin/
    │   └── packer_compiled.lua
    └── after\===============================(NEW SEGMENTS)
        └── plugin/
            └── plugin_name.lua
```

and to `telescope.lua` just add the lines:

```lua
local builtin = require('telescope.builtin')
vim.keymap.set('n','<leader>pf',builtin.find_files,{})
vim.keymap.set('n','<C-p>',builtin.git_files,{})
vim.keymap.set('n','<leader>ps',function()
    builtin.grep_string({ search = vim.fn.input("Grep > ")});
end)
```

##### New Keybinds for Telescope

- `<space>pf` - "project file", searches through all files
    - brings up a dialog box, just type what file you want and you jump there.
- `Ctrl+p` - searches through git file history
    - for Neovim remaps, `Ctrl+p` is denoted with `<C-p>`.
    - syntax is `<<press_and_hold_key_enumerator>-<key>>`
        - ie declaring `<a-p>` indicates pressing and holding Alt then p.
- `<space>ps` - "project search" searches through all files for a specific user-entered string
    - autoprompts and puts a grep string before your search
    - pulls up another dialog and previews for you where stuff is

### Adding Color schemes

Pick from [neovim-colorscheme](https://github.com/topics/neovim-colorscheme). Primagen used rose pine, I opted for [Catpuccin macchiato](https://github.com/catppuccin/nvim).

> [!NOTE] Installing Color themes
>
> 1. Under the repo for your theme, find the code snippet for installing with packer (or your choice of package manager)
> 2. Copy it into your packer.lua
>
> Worst case for Catpuccin macchiato, just use this snippet:
>
>```lua
>use {
>  'catppuccin/nvim',
>  as = 'catppuccin',
>  config = function()
>    require('catppuccin').setup({
>      flavour = 'frappe', -- Available: latte, frappe, macchiato, mocha
>      transparent_background = false,
>      term_colors = true,
>      styles = {
>        comments = { 'italic' },
>        conditionals = { 'italic' },
>      },
>      integrations = {
>        telescope = true,
>        cmp = true,
>        gitsigns = true,
>        nvimtree = true,
>        treesitter = true,
>        -- For more integrations: https://github.com/catppuccin/>nvim#integrations
>      }
>    })
>    
>    -- Set the colorscheme after configuration
>    vim.cmd.colorscheme 'catppuccin'
>  end
>}
>```
>
> For rose pine:
>
>```lua
>use({
>     'rose-pine/neovim',
>     as = 'rose-pine',
>     config = function()
>         vim.cmd('colorscheme rose-pine')
>     end
>})

#### Transparency

1. Update your file structure and add a file under `config/nvim/after/plugin/colors.lua`
2. simplify it into a function call:

    ```lua
    function ColorMyPencils(color)
        color = color or "catpuccin" -- or whatever your base theme is
        vim.cmd.colorscheme(color)
        vim.api.nvim_set_hl(0, "Normal",{ bg = 'none'})
        vim.api.nvim_set_hl(0, "NormalFloat",{ bg = 'none'})
    ```

    [How `nvim_set_hl` works](https://neovim.io/doc/user/api.html#nvim_set_hl())

## Setting up a Language Server Protocol (LSP)

Treesitter only does highlighting and very primitive functions for your understanding code. LSPs analyse code and add more with autocomplete, linting and other language specific features. This then gets sent to our client (neovim) and we see recommendations.
<!-- TODO: add a collection for LSPs under CS Lore-->

> [!warning] Misconceptions about LSPs
>
> - **LSPs arent cross compatible between clients** (ie between VS Code and Neovim). LSPs might be open standard, but each client has a different interface, so each server is implemented to fit that interface. It doesn't work like plug and play (so you can't just use the same LSP for Neovim as VScode.)

<details>  
<summary>Readings</summary>
  
- [Microsoft's LSP documentation for implementation](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/)
- [Neovim's LSP documentation for configuration](https://neovim.io/doc/user/lsp.html)

</details>

> [!note]
> Debugging functionality is provided by a Debug Adapter Protocol (DAP) Server.

Pre Neovim v 0.11: [Install LSP-zero](https://github.com/VonHeikemen/lsp-zero.nvim)

CAA 28 Mar 2025, Neovim now has its own LSP doesn't need new plugins. [Full Installation guide here](https://lsp-zero.netlify.app/blog/lsp-config-overview.html). [Also possible without plugins](https://lsp-zero.netlify.app/blog/lsp-config-without-plugins)

### Picking an language server

You can refer to the official Microsoft maintained [Language server list](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/implementors/servers/), but ultimately only pick from those that [Neovim is compatible with](https://github.com/neovim/nvim-lspconfig/blob/master/doc/configs.md). To figure out what you want, you can consider: ([suggested from this post](https://www.reddit.com/r/neovim/comments/zhtmdj/how_do_you_choose_which_language_server_you_want/))

- **How well maintained it is** -  whos maintaining it and whether support exists for long, for some reason just not having Microsoft (MS) being involved is a strong recommendation. If theres an official language server for a language, just use it.
- **Features** - Every server has different implementations for the same thing. This is more trial and error so just go online and quickly research the differences.

Here's a list of Language servesr I'll  be using:

| Language | Server |
| ----------- | ----------- |
| lua | luals |
| Python | python-lsp-server |
| Go | gopls |
| Rust | Rust-analyser |
|C++/clang \| C/C++/Objective-C | clangd \| ccls |
| Typescript | typescript-language-server |
| Javascript | quick-lint-js |
| Haskell | hls |
